Previously on "the hunting party"...
it's called the pit.
It's home to the most
dangerous and violent criminals
in history. all of whom the
world believes are dead.
Or at least it was until the blast hit.
Are you gonna ask me out or what?
No.
Maybe.
Your father is the only
one who can tell me
who my biological mother is.
Can I speak with him?
You know you can't.
It's my mother.
Hi. Shane.
We need to talk.
Let's talk about serial killers.
Was the bay area butcher born a killer.
or did his environment turn him into one?
Is a sociopath a result
of nature or nurture?
Well. that is a question
that has plagued scientists
and academics for centuries.
In fact. some behavioral
psychiatrist at Quantico
is probably asking that
very question right now.
Unfortunately. they're
looking for an answer
they'll never find.
I propose. while environment
clearly plays a part.
it is the anatomical
structure of one's brain.
our nature.
that will determine which of
us will become the next butcher.
Hey. man. you spare a few bucks?
Just trying to get a hot meal.
Tell you what. I'll do you one better.
I'm looking for paid participants
for a research study.
If you're interested.
I'll offer you a hot meal
and $20 on top.
What do you say?
Cold night to be on the streets?
Yeah... I'm working on getting a place.
Saving up.
I'm assuming your family can't help?
No. man. I kind of got no one.
My wife makes these. and
they're just... just delicious.
Here. please help yourself.
Unless you'd rather not
take candy from a stranger.
No. I love toffee. Thanks.
So you're some kind of teacher?
Yes. neuroscience.
I have an md and phd.
which means I practice.
and I do research.
Wow.
I barely graduated daycare.
Well. I'm sure you'll find
your purpose in this world.
Yeah. school was never really...
never really...
Well. good news. Johnny.
Your life will not be in vain.
I mean. I don't want to
sound condescending.
but let's be honest. you
were going nowhere fast.
What happened?
Just relax.
Almost there.
No.
No. no. no. no!
There's really only
so much you can learn
from textbooks and teachers.
Real knowledge can only
be gained through experience
and taking chances that most people just
don't have the stomach for.
One of those chances might
just turn out to change the world.
And who knows. Johnny.
you might still prove
to be more important
than you ever imagined.
I'm sorry. I don't... I don't know.
This is... is a lot to take in.
I understand.
When did you realize?
The moment I saw you
in the command center.
So I pulled your military DNA records
and ran them against mine.
When I was an inmate at the pit.
Dr. Dulles used to let me watch
some of your sessions with him.
Those moments meant everything to me.
- Then once I was out of the pit...
- Graduated?
That's what Dulles liked to call it.
And I finally had my freedom.
he still refused to tell me
anything more about you
or where you lived.
And then... 20 years later. here you are.
I'm... I'm not really sure
what I'm supposed to say.
You don't have to say anything.
This can be whatever you want it to be.
Or don't.
But I would very much
like to get to know you.
You have my eyes.
Half-caf with cream and two sugars.
Someone's paying attention.
Details matter.
- But did you...
- Pour the decaf in first?
Yes.
Although I haven't
figured out why you do that.
And I plan on remaining a mystery.
Morales.
What do we got?
Facial rec picked up this photo.
It was sent by a Harvard
undergrad to his roommates.
I assume we already
accessed the phones remotely
and scrubbed the image?
- Done.
- Don't tell congress.
And the students have no idea
they just captured a real image
of Sidney Fairfax.
The Boston 9 case.
Guess he was more
than a person of interest.
Boston 9... why does
that sound so familiar?
It's an infamous unsolved
case from 1990 to 1995.
Nine bodies were found
buried in the remote woods
beside the Concord river.
each with a section
of their brain removed.
It's never just a good old
shot to the chest anymore.
is it?
What?
You know what I meant.
You know. these cuts
look very professional.
I mean. almost surgical.
That's what the cops thought. too.
which is why Sidney Fairfax.
an esteemed professor
wound up on their radar.
along with other rumored suspects.
But before they could build a case.
he died in a one-car accident
driving home from Harvard.
Big air quotes on that "one."
Sounds to me like somebody figured out
Fairfax was the Boston 9 guy.
didn't want the public to know the truth.
so they disappeared him inside the pit.
You're right. this is the first time
the pit has faked the death of an inmate
before they were caught for their crimes.
What do we have on his therapies?
From what I'm seeing. he
was never officially treated.
There are no therapies.
no treatment logs. nothing.
Whoever hid him in the pit really wanted
to make sure he vanished.
Ok. morales. can you
and the team pull up
any public information...
biographies. interviews.
anything that he's done?
Anything we can use
to get inside his head.
- We're on it.
- Hey.
Sorry I'm late.
You ok?
Yeah. yeah.
just set my alarm to P.M.. like an idiot.
Where are we headed?
Boston.
Hope you brought a jacket.
Hello. professor.
Professor alanson?
Hello?
Campus.
Hippo... hippopota... campus.
Campumus is the hippopamplemousse.
Professor?
A-Are you ok?
Help me.
Help!
Somebody. help!
All right. note the slightly reduced
volume in the prefrontal lobe.
the moderately reduced connections
between the amygdala
and the prefrontal cortex.
Every serial killer I have studied
shares a number of
these anatomical features.
Well. you may be
wondering. if we can just
scan someone's brain and
determine their predisposition
toward murderous violence.
shouldn't we be able to stop
them before they start?
Unfortunately. not so simple.
because these unique structures
are not isolated to killers alone.
For example. structurally.
this patient's brain
is no different from
your average serial killer.
Yet this scan belongs to...
My assistant. Mr. Clive alanson.
So far. he hasn't killed
anyone that we know of.
So we have to ask. why is one a killer
and the other my assistant?
Where is that biological
switch inside their minds?
And what flips it from off to on?
Loves the sound of his
own voice. doesn't he?
Yeah. he does.
Five years old Fairfax
was labeled a gifted child
and wound up skipping several grades.
In multiple interviews.
he mentions feeling
completely out of step with
his much older classmates.
It's my guess that over time.
Fairfax's antisocial traits
bloomed into a full-blown lifestyle.
So he retreated into academia.
where his smarts were an asset.
- not a liability.
- Let me guess.
He's one of those kids
that went to Harvard at 16.
15.
At 20. he had his md and his phd.
And at 25. he was a tenured
professor and a leading voice
in the convergence of criminal anatomy.
neuroscience. and
antisocial personality disorder.
Doogie howser. the serial killer.
Now. that is a show I would watch.
Hey. what's the over-under
on serial killers being geniuses?
On TV. yeah. pretty
high. but not in real life.
Sidney Fairfax was in
his own class of mind.
like a Ted kaczynski. another Ivy leaguer.
or a Rodney alcala.
Alcala.
The dating game killer. ucla.
If these guys are such brilliant geniuses.
why are they making
such horrible life choices?
'Cause he didn't see it
as a horrible life choice.
Sidney savored the
power and control he felt
over killing an innocent person.
He could recognize his victim's
distress but didn't weight it.
The consequences
of his actions on others
meant absolutely nothing to him.
Plus. being a professor
would have allowed him
to hide in plain sight.
I'm sure that was part of the thrill.
Yeah. super-thrilling stuff.
Hey. morales. what's up?
I've been monitoring
Boston pd scanners.
Get this. Fairfax had an
assistant named clive alanson.
- Yeah. we know who he is.
- Was.
Alanson was just found
dead in his lab at Harvard.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Whoa.
I did not take the professor
for a "hell raiser" fan.
If morales can identify
what these pins are.
maybe we can figure out
where Fairfax got them.
What are we thinking? Torture?
There's an injection site on his carotid.
Fairfax drugged him.
If he wanted to torture him. he
would have left him wide awake.
Ok. so what are you thinking?
Like. this was punishment. or?
Whatever it was. we need to figure out
where this mad scientist is going next.
Morales. where are you with facial rec.
traffic cams. anything?
Still nothing.
What are you thinking. bex?
Let's find out if the kid who
found him is still on campus.
They think I did it.
They told me to get a lawyer.
I... I don't have a lawyer.
Hey. Jack. I need you to
do something for me. ok?
Can you make two fists?
Both hands?
Tight.
Squeeze really hard.
Now release.
You just went through
something really horrible.
and right now. your brain
is flooding your body with...
with epinephrine and cortisol.
Yeah. by squeezing my fist.
I am flushing the blood to my muscles
where chemicals can be absorbed.
Yeah. yeah.
Jack. we don't think
that you killed alanson.
Can you get me out of here?
We can. and we will. but
we just need to ask you
a few questions first.
Can you tell us anything
about those pins?
Our colleague identified
them as electrodes
used in deep-brain stimulation.
That's right.
They're incredibly cutting edge.
Whoever killed alanson. could they have
gotten those pins in the lab?
Yes. but I've never seen dbs electrodes
implanted in those
areas of the skull before.
- Why not?
- 'Cause it's crazy.
It's unsafe.
It could cause strokes. hemorrhages.
Do you know anyone who
would implant them like that?
No. but I... I can tell you. whoever did
definitely knew what they were doing.
I mean. those were freehand burr holes.
I... I don't follow.
Only a highly skilled brain surgeon
trained in the latest
technology could have done that.
Hey. Shane. It's Sarah.
I just wanted you to
know my dad passed away
a few nights ago in his sleep.
I'm just glad he went peacefully.
We can talk whenever.
Shane.
Morales. I need you to pull
up Tom beecher's medical file.
Yeah. Why not?
Since we're on the topic of barbaric
experimental brain surgeries.
How is it that a guy
who's in prison for 30 years
performs a cutting-edge
surgery with technology
that was developed decades
after he wound up in the pit?
You don't think Fairfax
was just sitting on the bench.
No. I think he was working down there.
I mean. look. Tom beecher.
he had brain surgeries
performed in the pit.
We always assumed that it was Dulles.
But what if Fairfax was the
one actually performing them?
I'm sending you beecher's records now.
Take a look at the letters
next to Dulles's signature.
Sf. Sidney Fairfax.
Seems like Dulles wasn't the only one
using pit inmates as specimens.
There are at least 20
other patients with sf initials
in their medical files.
and that's just after a 15-second search.
Also explains why Fairfax's
pit files never existed.
He wasn't just an inmate.
He was a visiting professor.
Can I help you?
Willa Sanchez?
Yes.
I'm with the university.
My name is Dr. Fairfax.
Dr. Charles. we were
hoping that you could
help us with another inmate.
What can you tell us about
professor Sidney Fairfax?
Was there any way that
he continued his work
when he was in the pit?
Sidney's time in the pit was regrettable.
Yes. he continued his research.
He was even encouraged
to by Dr. Dulles.
Fairfax believed that
serial killers' brains shared
specific anatomical traits.
that biology could predict
an individual's potential for murder.
So the population inside the pit
offered him access to
hundreds of ideal test subjects.
Dr. Dulles was fascinated
by Sidney's work.
despite the obvious moral erosion.
Ok.
What can you tell us
about Fairfax's work
in deep-brain stimulation?
Sidney believed in select patients.
he could use dbs to stimulate
dormant. violent tendencies
in nonviolent subjects.
Like flipping a biological
switch in their minds.
A noble pursuit if the goal simply
had been to flip the switch
off in violent offenders.
Are you saying it wasn't?
I'm saying when it comes to the pit.
things are never as simple as they seem.
- If a switch can be turned off...
- It can be turned on.
Exactly.
Dulles believed it was impossible.
Of course inside the pit.
there weren't any nonviolent offenders
to test his theory upon.
So he used other inmates
as disposable lab rats.
Ok. so who is right?
We'll never know.
Dulles lost his mind.
And without Dulles. Fairfax
stayed locked in his cell.
Until now.
Morales.
I've got a report of a 911
call about an injured woman
wandering the streets of Cambridge.
She had. "things drilled into her head."
ID says Willa Sanchez.
Get this to the team
and find out what hospital
they're taking her to.
I'm going to have the
doctor come speak with you.
Ok. thank you.
I have been on this since the beginning.
They're still working to
stabilize Willa Sanchez.
But they said they would
let me know... Shane.
Hey.
Sorry.
Is Willa going to make it?
Are you ok?
You're just really out of it today.
Does this have anything to do with
why you were late this morning?
Shane.
Bureaucratic son of a bitch.
That was Langley.
Lazarus played me.
Her whole balance of
power speech. garbage.
What happened?
She leveraged the
attack on Cyrus's convoy
to assume military control over
all future prisoner transports.
What? She can do that?
She just did.
You can see her now.
It's one visitor at a time.
and it has to be quick.
The or is already prepped.
Willa.
Willa. my name is Rebecca Henderson.
I'm here to help you.
I want to catch the
man that did this to you.
I'm... I'm late for class.
No. You're in the hospital.
Willa. can you hear me?
No. no. no. no. I can't be late.
I think we need to end this here.
No. no. no. no. no! No. I can't be late.
What are you going to be late for. Willa?
Doctor. he's at class.
Always at class.
Which class will you be late for?
N-N-N... Neuro... neuro...
neuro... neuroscience.
She's getting agitated. That's enough.
He locks the doors. Can't be late.
- Who? Who locks the doors?
- The professor.
Professor Fairfax?
Professor Dulles.
So Willa Sanchez knew Dulles.
Dulles knew Fairfax.
Who knew clive alanson.
Who had the brain of
a benign psychopath.
You think Fairfax targeted Willa
because she had the same
type of brain as alanson?
What if Fairfax was still trying
to win his argument with Dr. Dulles
and use Dulles's former
students at mit to do so?
Hey. morales.
We need everything
the pit has on Dr. Dulles.
I hate to say it. but we've exhausted
everything we have on Dulles.
Except he does have a daughter
who lives in Boston. Sarah Dulles.
- Ok.
- All right.
Send us her information.
Maybe she knows something.
Yep. on it.
She doesn't.
What?
She just cleared out her dad's place
and sent me everything that she had.
What the hell are you talking about?
Ok. it's a long story. and I
promise. I'm going to explain.
But if Dulles has anything
on Fairfax in his files.
it'll be at my apartment.
Morales. I need you and
peck to go to Shane's.
Get anything you can find.
Comms off.
We gotta talk.
Why?
Why didn't you tell us about Sarah?
I know. I should have
told you earlier. but...
but you thought we wouldn't find out.
No.
No. it's not that at all.
It's... it's complicated.
Look. I told you. I
have been searching for
my biological mother. right?
And Dulles. he was my
best shot at finding her.
Sarah sent me a message
about an hour ago.
Dulles died a few days back.
Days?
You told us weeks ago
that he was already dead.
Guys. I'm sorry that I
didn't tell you about this.
but this was never about
me keeping secrets from you.
This was about me finding my mother.
And I did.
Actually. she found me.
She's... Lazarus.
You knew.
For how long?
A couple days.
I was gonna tell you.
But you didn't.
What... you kept it from me.
Yeah. we could say the
same thing about you.
What?
These aren't even
close to the same thing.
No. I didn't have to tell you about this.
but I still did.
Sure. months later. after
you intentionally lied to us.
I have never withheld anything
that could jeopardize a case.
Never. never.
This was strictly personal.
You know what?
- If he...
- no. no. Stop. stop. stop.
What. am I supposed to go after him?
Fairfax is out there.
Let's focus on that.
Of all the gin joints in all
the towns in all the world.
Dulles's files were in
Shane's apartment all along.
Yeah.
You don't seem surprised.
I'm learning not to be
shocked by anything
when it comes to this job. or anyone.
No.
No. Shane is solid.
Whatever this is. he had a good reason.
Wait.
Look at this. It's... Willa Sanchez.
This is from a 2002 longitudinal study
when Dulles was still chair at mit.
The cohort is 30 freshmen students.
"Subject shows signs of
reduced frontal lobe volume.
"reduced connections
between the prefrontal cortex
and the amygdala."
That's the way Fairfax described
the bay area butcher's
brain at his lecture.
If everyone from this study
has the same description...
Dulles must have shared
it with Fairfax at the pit.
Any one of these people
could be Fairfax's next victim.
Got it. Yes. ma'am.
I'll let the team know.
Guys. I've got locations
on all 30 individuals
who participated in the study.
Only three are still in the area.
Sending you their addresses now.
None of these are far.
We're on it.
You've reached Sarah Dulles.
I can't come to the phone right now.
Please leave a message.
Hey. Sarah.
It's... well. it's Shane.
I'm actually in Boston.
and. well. I... I learned some things.
and I was hoping we could talk.
So. I... I looked at your dad's place. but...
you're not home.
Sir?
Sir. I'm with the police.
Damn.
Buddy.
We need to get you some help. all right?
But first. I need to know.
where is professor Fairfax?
Ok.
It's Shane.
Hey.
421 pine street now.
I'm going to need you
to put the plates down.
Listen. Listen. buddy.
I do not want to hurt you.
Help is on the way.
I need you to stay where you are. ok?
No!
Just relax. ok?
I'm here to help you.
Whoa. whoa! Hey!
Sorry.
Ok. All right.
There again. reduced
activity in the amygdala.
But the orbitofrontal cortex
is higher than average.
For his age group. yes.
but he is already showing signs
of an overly active ventral striatum.
We'll see what happens
once he hits puberty.
Shane. keep going.
Ok.
I just want to do better than last time.
If I do better. can I go home?
You can go home when we're done.
You're awake.
Splendid.
I cannot tell you how
often I have thought
about you over the years.
The little boy born in the pit.
There was always something
so special about you.
You remember me?
No. no. no.
It's ok if you don't.
But I think that you and I are
haunted by the same question...
nurture or nature?
Guys. that address
is Dulles's townhouse.
Right. Go right.
Yeah. I'm familiar with which way right is.
Dulles wanted you to
have a happy childhood
to prove that environment shapes
the mind more than biology.
He wanted so desperately
for you just to be a normal kid.
But somewhere inside
him. he knew you couldn't be.
And I think that you.
my perfect test subject.
have been brought back to me
like some act of divine Providence
to finally prove that I am right.
Psychopathy on demand is possible.
If only Dulles were here to see this.
What... you have something to add?
You don't know what
you're talking about.
You want to see a killer's brain?
Why don't we open up your head?
I'll bet you've taken more
lives than I have. my friend.
Not... in the line of
duty and self-defense.
It was protecting people.
It's not... it's not the same thing.
I know you believe that.
but when we're done here.
you will understand
the truth about yourself.
You will understand what it means
to be the son of Evelyn Lazarus.
Or do you call her Caitlin?
You know nothing about her anymore.
I helped make Evelyn
Lazarus what she is today.
I think I know a thing or two.
Your mother was just
the beginning. Shane.
But you. I think. may be the end.
I have waited 30 years to get inside
that little head of yours.
Yeah. you can drill
all the holes you want.
but the only psychopath
down here is you.
Let's find out.
That's a good boy.
Sir.
He's alive.
Sir. can you hear me?
Don't worry. this is just a mild sedative.
It won't knock you out.
but it will keep you from
moving around too much
once I start to cut.
You'll be pleased to
know that brain tissue
has no pain receptors.
Unfortunately. the scalp
most certainly does.
So if you can handle
the drill... We're gold.
So let's just give that a moment.
and then we can begin.
Shane. you're doing great.
Don't scream.
They don't like it when we scream.
911. what's your emergency?
We need an ambulance at 421 pine.
Where the hell is Shane?
Shane can't have just
disappeared into thin air.
What are we missing?
We need to talk to someone
that knew Fairfax and Dulles.
Agent Henderson?
Shane was taken by Sidney Fairfax.
Look. I know you care
about him as much as I do.
How can I help?
We tracked Fairfax to a
townhouse owned by Dr. Dulles.
There is no sign that
Shane or Fairfax are here.
You're in the right place.
just not the right level.
We searched the whole house.
No. you haven't.
Of course. there's a creepy doorway.
Fairfax. freeze!
Make one more move. and I
will shoot you where you stand.
Well. that would be a
terrible miscalculation.
because I've got a cranial drill
4 millimeters from
plunging into little Shane's
temporal lobe.
I don't know. doc.
I'm a pretty good shot.
Well. you're welcome
to take your chances. ok?
But I'm telling you that
one flick of my finger.
and it's the end for your friend here.
Wait. stop!
Shane is not your lab rat.
He is brave and selfless.
He is a decorated marine.
and yet he is way too humble
to actually talk about that.
He also has the brain of a killer.
So...
It doesn't matter how
many holes you drill.
you won't change who Shane
is. who he has chosen to be.
He cares more deeply about people
than anyone I have ever met.
He is kind. he's loyal.
and he can quite literally
fall asleep wherever.
What do you possibly hope to gain
with these stupid
sentimental arguments?
Time.
He's down.
It took you guys long enough.
Yeah. we were pretty pissed.
You know. you didn't
need to get abducted
to remind us how
much we care about you.
Worked. didn't it?
All right. the team just cleaned up
everything at Dulles's place.
And Fairfax's body is en
route back to Cheyenne.
What a day.
So listen. I want to...
I want to say something to you guys.
Listen. you're good. man.
We're sorry.
You don't need to say anything.
No. I... I do.
So I've had this secret
from the time I was 15.
That's when I found out
my biological mother was a murderer.
Since then. I've been
keeping that secret. you know?
And I've spent so long just guarding it
and keeping people at
arm's length because of it
that I...
I've never known how to put it down.
But now. for the first time.
maybe ever. with you two.
I have something to lose.
So I'm sorry.
I'm sorry.
To putting it all out in the open.
I will drink to that.
Got your message.
Please. come sit.
I wanted to thank you
for saving Shane's life
and for ridding the world
of Dr. Sidney Fairfax.
Yeah.
Ok. I'm not really sure what this is.
but you should know that
Shane has told us everything.
Not everything.
There are still some pieces
I haven't shared with him.
So what. you're gonna
share them with me now?
There's no excuse for what I did.
but there is context.
Were you ever bullied
in school. Rebecca?
Bullies aren't just in school.
Indeed. but mine were.
And they were merciless.
I was 17 years old. not
comfortable in my own skin.
and I was not equipped to
navigate what was done to me.
I didn't care about the consequences.
All I cared about was
if I became the killer.
I'd no longer be the victim.
What I didn't know was
that there was something
wrong with me. what I would
later come to understand
as homicidal psychopathy.
But Dr. Dulles and the pit cured me.
I served my time. and
now I serve my country.
It's a very sympathetic story.
Reform is possible. Rebecca.
And I'm living proof.
She's here.
Hey. how'd it go with Lazarus?
I think she's one of the
most dangerous sociopaths
I've ever met.
And whatever she's up
to. we're gonna stop her.